Farm Operations for April 
WHEAT 
 
Last irrigation to wheat sown after December 5th, should be given up to 10 th of April. Avoid 
irrigation on windy/stormy day. 
SUGARCANE 
1. Fields infested with dila, post-emergence application of 800 g per acre 2, 4-D sodium salt 
80 WP in 200 litres of water is recommended. Do not sow moong/mash as inter crop, if 
sugarcane has been sprayed with herbicide. 
2. Irrigate the crop at 7 -12 days interval for better growth of the crop. Apply 65 kg urea per 
acre to ratoon crop. 
3. Apply paddy straw or rice husk or sugarcane trash @ 20 -25 q/acre between the rows of 
sugarcane to reduce soil temperature and moisture loss. 
4. The incidence of black bug in this crop can be checked by spraying 350 ml of 
Dursban/Lethal/Massban/Goldban 20 EC in 400 lit res of water per acre with manually 
operated sprayer. Direct the spray material into the leaf whorl. 
5. Mite feeds on lower side of leaves under fine web. The leaves turn red and later appear to 
be burnt. Baru ( Sorghum halepens) is the alternative host plant of mite. So, destroy the 
weeds, growing near the sugarcane fields. 
6. Do not ratoon the crop if it is severely affected with red rot or wilt. 
COTTON 
1. Start sowing of recommended varieties/hybrids of cotton including Bt cotton or desi 
cotton during this month. Sow seeds in polythene bags to fill gaps in cotton. Give deep 
ploughings in paddy fields, where puddling was done continuously for longer periods as 
the hard layer developed due to puddling adversely affects the deep penetration of roots. 
Apply heavy pre -sowing irrigation with good quality water for better germination and 
crop stand. 
2. To reduce the attack of leaf curl disease, avoid growing American cotton in citrus 
orchards and adjoining bhindi crop. Avoid growing bhindi, moong, castor and arhar in 
the cott on crop and as border rows to reduce the incidence of American and spotted 
bollworm; jassid and whitefly. But , control such insect pests on these crops grown in the 
vicinity of cotton fields properly to check their migration to the cotton crop. 
3. In wilt infested fields, prefer to sow LD 949 and LD 1019 varieties of desi cotton. 
4. At the time of sowing, smear the cotton seed with Gaucho 70 WS (imidacloprid) @ 5 g or 
Cruiser 30 FS (thiomethoxan) @ 7 g/kg seed for preventing damage by cotton jassid. 
5. Sow both American cotton and desi cotton varieties in rows at 67.5 cm apart with plant to 
plant distance of 60 cm for American Cotton and 45 cm in case of Desi Cotton but for Bt 
cotton hybrids it should be 75 cm. 
6. Drill 75 kg single superphosphate or 27 kg DAP per acre at the time of sowing. If cotton 
succeeds wheat, which received recommended dose of phosphorus, omit its application to 
cotton. In coarse textured soils, half dose of nitrogen (33 kg urea/acre to non-Bt varieties 
and 45 kg urea/acre to hybrids and Bt cotton) may be applied at the time of sowing 
instead of at thinning . Where 27 kg DAP is used, reduce the urea dose by 10 kg. Use 
PAU–LCC for need based urea application. Apply 20 kg muriate of potash in soils low in 
available potassium. Also apply 10 kg zi nc sulphate heptahydrate or 6.5 kg zinc sulphate 
monohydrate to cotton in zinc deficient soils. 
7. For controlling weeds, spray Stomp 30 EC (pendimethalin) @ 1.0 litre/acre as pre -
emergence application in 200 litres of water. At the time of spray, there s hould be 
sufficient moisture in the soil. For controlling itsit which emerges with first irrigation, 
Stomp @ 1.0 liter per acre can also be applied after first irrigation. 
 
SUNFLOWER 
1. Since the weather is quite hot during this month, apply irrigations at 8 -10 days interval. 
The crop should not be under stress at flowering, soft dough and hard dough stages. 
SUMMER PULSES 
 Try to complete the sowing of sathi moong and sathi mash during the first week of this 
 month. 
SUMMER GROUNDNUT 
Groundnut variety SG 99 / M 522 can be sown during the end of this month under 
irrigated conditions. Treat the kernels before sowing with 2ml Neonix 20 FS or 1.5g 
Seedex or 5g Thiram (75%) or 3 g of Indofil M -45 (75%) per kg kernels. Neonix treated 
seed also give protection from attack of White grub and termite. 
TURMERIC 
1. Start planting turmeric from the end of this month. 
2. Planting of turmeric should be done in rows , keeping 45 cm row to row spacing for 
manual operations and 67.5 cm for mechanical, whereas, plant to plant spacing is 
maintained at 15 cm. Six to eight quintal of rhizomes are sufficient for sowing one acre. 
3. Apply 10 -12 tonnes of well -rotten Farmyard Manure before planting and 60kg single 
super phosphate per acre at planting. Also apply consortium biofertilizer @ 4kg/ acre at 
planting. Apply 16 kg muriate of potash per acre in soils low in available potassium. 
4. Spread uniformly 36 q/acre paddy straw over the entire field for weed control. 
FODDERS 
1. For early kharif fodders, sowing of bajra, maize, cowpea etc. may be carri ed out after 
harvesting rabi crops. Cowpea is a very quick growing leguminous fodder which can be 
sown as a mixture with maize or bajra. 
2. Take last cutting of berseem which is to be kept for seed during this month. Berseem crop 
for seed production should be frequently irrigated. Kashni and other weeds should be 
rogued out. 
3. Stop irrigation to lucerne after full blossom to arrest vegetative growth for better seed 
production. 
4. Grow perennial fodders on some area. For this purpose, guinea grass and napier bajra can 
be sown in April. 
RECLAIMING SALINE AND ALKALI SOILS 
 For reclamation of kallar soils, follow the steps given below: 
1. Get the salt-affected soil tested from PAU or nearest soil testing laboratory. For this, take 
four samples upto 1 metre depth from 0-15 cm, 15-30 cm, 30-60 cm and below 60 cm. 
2. Prepare strong bunds around the field. 
3. After levelling and ploughing the field, apply heavy irrigation with good quality tubewell 
water or canal water so that excess salts leach down. 
4. When the field comes into field capacity ( watter), if recommended, apply gypsum 
according to soil test report. 
STORE GRAIN INSECT PESTS 
1. Store new grains in clean godowns or receptacles. Plug all cracks, crevices and holes in 
the godown thoroughly. Disinfest empty godowns or receptacles by spra ying 0.05% 
Malathion emulsion (100ml Malathion 50 EC in 10 litres of water) on the floors, walls 
and ceilings or fumigate the godowns using 25 tablets of aluminum phosphide/100 
cubic metres of empty space before storing grains. Exposure period is 7 days. 
VEGETABLES 
Tomato 
Irrigate the tomato crop once a week to encourage maximum fruit setting and 
development of fruits. Varieties viz. Punjab Ratta, Punjab Chhuhara, PNR -7 and Punjab Upma 
as well as hybrid TH-1 and PTH-2 start ripening during this month. Harvest the red turning and 
red ripe fruits regularly to catch distant and local markets, respectively. While harvesting the 
fruits, every precaution should be taken to minimize injury and disturbance to the natural 
canopy of the plants. 
 
Brinjal, Capsicum, Chilli and Cucurbits 
These vegetable crops sown under low –tunnel or poly net house conditions start giving 
fruits. Harvest fruits twice a week in the afternoon except bottle gourd where harvesting 
should be done in the morning. All the crops are po llinated by insects and human movement at 
flower opening and pollination time disturbs pollinators and cause serious setback to fruit -
setting and yield. Irrigate these crops once a week. 
Onion 
Take care of kharif onion nursery sown in March and irrigate re gularly after 5 -7 days 
intervals. 
Seed Production 
Harvest seed crops of pea, carrot, radish and turnip. In order to avoid shattering of seeds 
of carrot, turnip, pea and radish in the field, start harvesting even when a few topmost pods per 
branch are yello wish green. Shift immediately to the thrashing floor. After complete drying, 
thrash, grade and pack the seeds. In carrot, harvest seeds from primary and secondary umbels 
only. 
Chilli 
Transplant seedlings of chilli in the afternoon keeping ridges at 75 cm a nd plants at 45-
60 cm distance and apply light irrigation immediately. Apply 20 kg muriate of potash, 175 kg 
single superphosphate and 35 kg urea per acre. After a week, replant into the gaps and irrigate 
immediately. 
Garlic 
Stop irrigation in the first we ek but apply light irrigation prior to harvesting to facilitate 
the operation and uproot in the last week. Cure in the field for 5 to 7 days. Tie the produce in 
bundles of a kg each, shift in a cool and ventilated place. Sort out bulbs with dried cloves 
during storage. 
VEGETABLE PESTS 
 
1. Fruit borer attack in tomato crop can be checked by spraying 30 ml of Fame 480 SL or 60 
ml Coragen 18.5 or 200 ml Indoxacarb 14.5 SC in 100 litres of water per acre. Observe 
waiting period of 3 days after the spray of Fame and one day after the spray of Coragen. 
2. To protect the tomato crop from early blight spray the crop with Indofil M -45 @ 600 
g/acre in 200 litres of water. 
 
 
 
 
HORTICULTURAL OPERATIONS 
 
1. The temperature rises rapidly and relative humidity gets low during thi s month. The 
growers are advised to adopt the measures to save their valuable fruit trees particularly 
newly planted from drought and sun injury. Therefore, apply light and frequent 
irrigations during this month to young plants. Apply irrigation at 3 -4 days interval to 
peach varieties Partap, Shan -e-Punjab and Florda Prince as the fruits are developing 
during this period. 
2. The fruit trees loaded with fruits such as Shan-e-Punjab and of plum like Kala Amritsari 
and Sutlej Purple normally need fruit thinning i n early days of the month to minimize 
the danger of limb -breakage and to improve the marketable size and quality of the 
fruits. 
3. Apply second dose of inorganic fertilizers to the fruit trees of citrus, pear, litchi, plum, 
grapes, mango, litchi etc. 
4. The stock sprouts emerging from the newly planted young fruit plants below the bud 
union should be removed/pinched off regularly. 
5. In young orchards summer moong can be sown as an intercrop upto first week of this 
month. 
6. The zinc deficiency in citrus can be managed with spray of 0.3 zinc sulphate (3g/litre of 
water) solution, without addition of lime, to spring flush. 
7. For crop regulation to get better fruiting in winter seasons guava crop, spray urea @ 
10% or 600 mg/litre NAA during April -May when maximum flowers have opened. 
Pruning of terminal portion of shoots (20 -30 cm) in last week of April can also be done 
to avoid rainy season crop. Also withhold irrigation during this period. 
8. Spray 200 ml Crocodile/Confidor 17.8 SL or 160 g Actara/Dotara 25 WG or 6.25 litr e 
Mak H.M.O. per acre in 500 litres of water on citrus crop to control citrus psylla and 
aphids. 
9. Mulching of pear orchards with paddy straw @ 5.5 ton per acre can be done in this 
month. In addition to weed suppression, fruit yield and quality also improved with 
paddy straw mulching. 
ORNAMENTALS 
Annuals 
1. Summer annuals like Cosmos, Gaillardia, Gomphrena, Kochia, Zinnia etc. can be 
transplanted in the prepared beds or pots preferably during evening followed by light 
irrigation. 
2. Ripened seeds or seed pods collected from the winter flowering annuals are cleaned shade 
dried, labeled and stored cool dry place in air tight containers. 
Permanent plants 
 Need-based periodic irrigation is required for the permanent landscape plants as the 
temperature is expected to rise. Division of canna rhizomes can be made for propagation. 
Chrysanthemum 
 Periodic pinching of chrysanthemum suckers planted in beds will ensure more 
bushiness and lateral branches. Regular weeding and irrigation is done to keep the soil moist. 
Roses 
 Flowering of the rose will almost be over in this month. Continue removing faded, dried 
flowers and root-stock suckers. Ensure required soil moisture with timely irrigation. 
Lawns 
 Irrigate the lawns through sprinklers for retaining vigor and lush green c arpet. 
Periodically remove the deep rooted weeds manually with hand hoe. Avoid walking on lawn 
immediately after irrigation. 
Pot plants 
The pots must be periodically irrigated to ensure sufficient moisture. Groom the foliage 
plants by removing dead and d ried leaves. Foliage plants sensitive to hot sun rays 
should be shifted under partial shady and well ventilated locations. 
Bulbous plants 
 The Gladioli corms should be harvested, cleaned and dried in shade for 2 -3 days before 
storing in crates or gunny bag s in cold storage at 4 °C. The summer flowering bulbs of 
Caladiums, Football Lilly and Tuberose, if not planted during March, should be planted early 
during this month. 
 
Marigold 
The healthy seedlings of summer marigold ‘Punjab Gainda No.1’, if not pla nted earlier during 
February-March can be transplanted in the field during evening hours, followed by light 
irrigation. 
AGROFORESTRY 
Poplar 
1. As the temperature has started rising, thus irrigate the poplar plantations at 7 -10 days 
interval instead of fortnightly. 
2. Turmeric and sugarcane can be sown in poplar having less than three years of age. In the 
plantations of more than three years age, fodder crops should be raised. 
3. The attack of Poplar leaf defoliator and leaf webber starts in this month. Control the 
insects by collecting and destroying infested leaves. 
 
Eucalyptus 
Keep on irrigating the Eucalyptus plantations at 15 days intervals during April. 
BEE KEEPING 
Bee strength of honey bee colonies during April is about at peak. Manage colonies to prevent 
and check swarming. Colonies should be provided enough space in the form of raised empty 
combs or frames with comb foundations and super chambers to provide space for brood rearing 
and honey storage. First fortnight of the month is still suitable for queen bee rearing. If drone 
brood rearing is continued, the stock multiplication can be undertaken either by selectively 
dividing the colonies or through mass rearing the queen bees. The progressive beekeepers 
should prefer the latter method for its well known a dvantages. Older queen bees may also be 
replaced, if not replaced as yet during the season, with the new ones raised preferably from the 
selected good stock following mass queen bee rearing technique. Dust sulphur powder on the 
top bars of bee combs @ 1.0 g per comb against brood mite ( Tropilaelaps clareae ). 
Alternatively, fumigation with formic acid (85%) @ 5 ml daily for two weeks may be applied. 
The latter treatment will also take care of Varroa mite. In the case of infestation by Varroa, 
destruction o f sealed drone brood comb part, Varroa trapping in drone brood and then its 
destruction and use of sticky papers with Varroa bottom board, can also be integrated. On 
suspicion of the brood diseases, immediately consult expert and suggested control measures 
should be undertaken; non -chemical methods should be preferred. Do not use antibiotics. 
Proper spacing among the colonies and extraction of honey only from the supers separated 
from brood chamber with queen excluder help in preventing spread of Varroa and brood 
diseases among the colonies in an apiary. If Eucalyptus is in bloom around the apiary and 
colonies have surplus sealed honey, it should be extracted. Take a ll precautions, during and 
after honey extraction , for preventing robbing in the apiary. Aft erwards, commercial 
beekeepers may migrate their apiaries to sunflower growing areas. For enhancing apiary 
income, progressive beekeepers can adopt apicultural diversification through production/ 
collection of other hive products, viz. pollen, propolis, ro yal jelly and bee venom. Shift the 
colonies to thick shade. 
 
 
MUSHROOM FARMING 
 
1. Make arrangements for procuring wheat and paddy straw for the cultivation of button 
and dhingri mushroom for the next season (September -March). Store the procured 
agricultural residues in a dried and shady place. 
2. Book the spawn for summer mushroom varieties for the cultivation of paddy straw and 
milky mushrooms. 
3. Start making paddy straw bundles for the cultivation of paddy straw mushroom. For its 
cultivation, wet the prepared paddy straw bundles, make the mushroom beds as per 
recommended technology and add spawn to the prepared beds from mid-april onwards. 
4. Spray water on the spawned beds twice daily. Mushrooms start appearing after 10 -12th 
days of spawning and mushroom harvesting continues for three weeks. 
5. For cultivation of milky mushroom, use boiled wheat straw (2kg/bag) as per recommended 
technology. After completion of spawn run, bags will be ready for casing and mushrooms 
start appearing after case run (18-20 days). 
DAIRY FARMING 
 
1. Summer season is approaching, therefore efforts should be made to protect the animals 
from summer heat and stress. Keep fresh water available all the time. Provide fans to the 
animals for better air circulation in the farm. 
2. As feed intake is redu ced due to effect of high temperature. Hence, protein level in the 
concentrate mixture need to be increased which can be done by increasing oilseed cakes 
by 5-7 per cent. 
3. Watch the animals for heat symptoms and get the animal inseminated between 12 to 18 
hours after the onset of heat. 
4. Take adequate steps for calf management and feed colostrum within 1-2 hours of the 
 birth without waiting for expulsion of the placenta. 
5. To prevent tick infestation, spray the sheds/barn and animals regularly with Butox liquid 
@ 2 ml per litre of water and repeat after 10 days. 
6. Keep the shed and animal clean. 
7. Make sure that all the animals are vaccinated against FMD, if still not, then get them 
vaccinated immediately, keep their record and repeat after six months. 
8. Do not feed excess wheat/ cereals to dairy animals. This can be fatal. 
 
POULTRY FARMING 
 
1. It is the best time to replace the stock. Cull the unprofitable birds to provide sufficient 
space to young chicks. Brooding in these days can be carried out easily. 
2. Reduce the thickness of litter and change the wet litter. 
3. Provide cool and fresh water to birds. Provide sufficient number of waterers to avoid 
excess movement of birds. 
4. Vaccination schedule must be followed strictly. 
5. Vaccinate the chicks of 6-8 weeks of age with Ranikhet disease vaccine and fowl pox 
vaccine at 8-10 weeks of age. 
6. Start deworming the pullets at 3 months of age and then regularly at one month interval. 
7. White wash the poultry shed from outside especially roof. This will help to r eflect the 
sun rays. 
8. Provide artificial lights during early morning so that birds can consume feed in cool 
hours. 
9. In order to compensate decrease in feed intake, level of energy nutrients need to be 
increased which can be achived adding maize. 
10. Provide electrolytes, Vit. C @ 5gm/liter per 100 birds per day. 
 
 
Compiled by: Amarjit Singh 
 
Information supplied by: K.S. Suri, Amit Kaul, Arsh Alam Singh Gill, Jaswinder Singh 
Brar, Jaspal Singh, Navneet Kaur, Simrat Singh, Ruma Devi, Tejveer Singh and Shivan i 
Sharma.